docs/manual/source/docs/tutorials.rst, before:

.. SpM documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Thu Aug 10 10:08:31 2017.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

.. _tutorials:

Tutorials
===============================

Sample data are provided both for fermionic and bosonic cases:

    - ``samples/fermion``  # a sample for fermionic spectrum (data in the SpM article)
    - ``samples/fermion_twopeak``  # another sample for fermionic spectrum (data in the SpM-Pade article)
    - ``samples/boson``  # a sample for bosonic spectrum


Fermionic system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Here, an explanation is given for the fermionic case (``samples/fermion``).

Script
----------------------------------

User can execute all the steps explained below using a single script file ``run.sh``.
Edit some variables in the top of the script (explained later) and then run the script by

::

    $ ./run.sh

If succeeded, text files containing numerical data and graphs in EPS format are generated in ``output`` directory.
There are some parameters to control the behavior of the script;

::

    # =========================
    file_exe="../SpM.out"
    dir_plt="../plt"
    plot_level=1  # 0: no plot, 1: plot major data, 2: plot all data
    eps_or_pdf='eps'  # 'eps' or 'pdf' (epstopdf is required)
    # =========================

The fist one must be modified, at least, before running.

Make input files
----------------------------------

#. Green's function

    Input data for the imaginary time Green's function :math:`G(\tau)` should be provided on a linearly discretized mesh between :math:`\tau=0` and :math:`\beta`.
    The file ``Gtau.in`` contains sample data in the following manner

    ::

        #beta=100.000000
        #omega_max=4.000000
        0.0 -0.500733991018 -0.499999977255
        0.00025 -0.490129692246 -0.489780138726
        0.0005 -0.481350067927 -0.47987901351
        0.00075 -0.471476482364 -0.470285052549
        0.001 -0.46176235397 -0.460987168435
        ...
        0.999 -0.461487347988 -0.460987168435
        0.99925 -0.467256984842 -0.470285052549
        0.9995 -0.479129683576 -0.47987901351
        0.99975 -0.490428417896 -0.489780138726
        1.0 -0.499812460744 -0.499999977255

    Lines beginning with '#' are skipped.
    There are 3 columns, which corresponds to :math:`\tau_i/\beta`, :math:`G^{\rm input}(\tau_i)`, and :math:`G^{\rm exact}(\tau_i)`.
    ``SpM`` program actually reads only one column, in this case, the second column containing :math:`G^{\rm input}(\tau_i)`.
    User is requested to specify with ``column`` parameter which column should be read.
    Note that the value of :math:`G(\tau=\beta)` needs to be given in order to evaluate the integral intensity of :math:`\rho(\omega)`. It means that the integrated intensity is not necessarily be equal to 1 (0 for off-diagonal Green's function and some finite value for the self energy).

#. Parameters

    Parameters are passed to the ``SpM`` program by a text file.
    The file ``param.in`` shows a setting used in obtaining the demonstrative results;

    ::

        # INPUT/OUTPUT
        statistics="fermion"
        beta=100
        filein_G="Gtau.in"
        column=1
        fileout_spec="spectrum.dat"
        # OMEGA
        Nomega=1001
        omegamin=-4
        omegamax=4
        # ADMM
        lambdalogbegin=2
        lambdalogend=-6
        tolerance=1e-10
        maxiteration=1000

    As in Gtau.in, lines beginning with '#' are skipped.
    For details of each parameter and further optional parameters, see :ref:`inputfiles`


Run SpM
-------

In the directory ``samples/fermion/``, just type the command

::

    $ build_directory/src/SpM.out param.in

Results
-------

Results are stored as ordinary text format in ``output`` directory.
See :ref:`outputfiles` for details of each file.


Plot
-------------

User can generate graphs either in EPS format or in PDF format using gnuplot.
Move into directory ``output``, and type

::

    gnuplot path_to_SpM/samples/plt/*

to generate EPS files of main results. If you prefer PDF format, put ``flag_pdf=1`` option as

::

    gnuplot -e flag_pdf=1 path_to_SpM/samples/plt/*

Note that it requires ``epstopdf`` program in the PATH.
Next, move into directory ``lambda_opt`` and type

::

    gnuplot path_to_SpM/samples/plt/lambda_opt/*

Detailed results for the optimal value of :math:`\lambda` are then plotted.
Again, the option ``flag_pdf=1`` may be put to obtain PDF files.

Let us look at some graphs below.

- *spectrum.eps*

    The final result for the spectrum :math:`\rho(\omega)` is given in the file ``output/spectrum.eps``.

    .. image:: figs/spectrum.jpg

    The red line shows the computed spectrum, and the blue line shows the exact spectrum, which is provided in the file ``Gtau.in.dos`` (not output of the ``SpM`` program).

- *find_lambda_opt.eps*

    User should check how the regularization parameter :math:`\lambda` is determined and whether the choice is reasonable.
    Loot at the file ``output/find_lambda_opt.eps``

    .. image:: figs/find_lambda_opt.jpg

    The peak position gives the optimal choice :math:`\lambda_{\rm opt}=10^{-1.8}`.
    If the peak is not clear, the choice might not be reasonable. In this case, accuracy of the input should be improved.

- *y_sv-log.eps*

    One can see how much information in the input data is used for constructing the spectrum.
    See the file ``output/lambda_opt/y_sv-log.eps``

    .. image:: figs/y_sv-log.jpg

    The light blue points show the input data :math:`G'_l` transformed into the SVD basis, and red circles are data used in computing :math:`\rho(\omega)` above.
    The blue points show, for comparison, the exact :math:`G'_l` without noise, which is provided in the file ``Gtau.in.sv_basis`` (not output of the ``SpM`` program).


Bosonic system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample files are available at ``samples/boson``.

Users can deal with a bosonic system by only changing ``statistics`` parameter to ``"boson"`` from ``"fermion"`` in the parameter file.


SpM-Pade method
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample files are available at ``samples/fermion_twopeak``.

The SpM-Pade method is another SpM AC method, where unphysical oscillation in the SpM spectrum is reduced by using spectra reconstructed by the Pade AC method.

The cost function is

.. math::

   L_\text{SpM-Pade}(\boldsymbol{\rho}) = L_\text{SpM}(\boldsymbol{\rho}) + \frac{\eta}{2} \sum_i w_i \left(\rho(\omega_i) - \rho^\text{Pade}(\omega_i)\right)^2,

where

.. math:: 

   w_i = \left(1.0 + \left(\frac{\sigma^\text{Pade}(\omega_i)}{\rho^\text{Pade}(\omega_i)}\right)^2\right)^{-1}

and :math:`\rho^\text{Pade}(\omega_i)` and :math:`\sigma^\text{Pade}(\omega_i)` are the expectation value and standard deviation of the spectrum reconstructed by the Pade AC method from ``NSamplePade`` Green's functions with independent Gaussian noise.
The strength of the Gaussian noise is specified by ``g_sigma`` or the pair of ``filein_Gsigma`` and ``column_sigma`` parameters (see :ref:`inputfiles` for details).
The coefficient of the Pade weight, :math:`eta`, is specified by the ``PadeEta`` parameter.
If ``PadeEta = 0``, the original SpM method will be used.

.. image:: figs/spectrum_spmpade.png

The blue curve and red curve show the spectrum reconstructed by the SpM method (:math:`\eta=0`) and the SpM-Pade method (:math:`\eta=1`), respectively.
The black dashed curve shows the exact spectrum.

Commit message:

update sample for spm-pade

docs/manual/source/docs/tutorials.rst, after:

.. SpM documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Thu Aug 10 10:08:31 2017.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

.. _tutorials:

Tutorials
===============================

Sample data are provided both for fermionic and bosonic cases:

    - ``samples/fermion``  # a sample for fermionic spectrum (data in the SpM article)
    - ``samples/fermion_twopeak``  # another sample for fermionic spectrum (data in the SpM-Pade article)
    - ``samples/boson``  # a sample for bosonic spectrum


Fermionic system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Here, an explanation is given for the fermionic case (``samples/fermion``).

Script
----------------------------------

User can execute all the steps explained below using a single script file ``run.sh``.
Edit some variables in the top of the script (explained later) and then run the script by

::

    $ ./run.sh

If succeeded, text files containing numerical data and graphs in EPS format are generated in ``output`` directory.
There are some parameters to control the behavior of the script;

::

    # =========================
    file_exe="../SpM.out"
    dir_plt="../plt"
    plot_level=1  # 0: no plot, 1: plot major data, 2: plot all data
    eps_or_pdf='eps'  # 'eps' or 'pdf' (epstopdf is required)
    # =========================

The fist one must be modified, at least, before running.

Make input files
----------------------------------

#. Green's function

    Input data for the imaginary time Green's function :math:`G(\tau)` should be provided on a linearly discretized mesh between :math:`\tau=0` and :math:`\beta`.
    The file ``Gtau.in`` contains sample data in the following manner

    ::

        #beta=100.000000
        #omega_max=4.000000
        0.0 -0.500733991018 -0.499999977255
        0.00025 -0.490129692246 -0.489780138726
        0.0005 -0.481350067927 -0.47987901351
        0.00075 -0.471476482364 -0.470285052549
        0.001 -0.46176235397 -0.460987168435
        ...
        0.999 -0.461487347988 -0.460987168435
        0.99925 -0.467256984842 -0.470285052549
        0.9995 -0.479129683576 -0.47987901351
        0.99975 -0.490428417896 -0.489780138726
        1.0 -0.499812460744 -0.499999977255

    Lines beginning with '#' are skipped.
    There are 3 columns, which corresponds to :math:`\tau_i/\beta`, :math:`G^{\rm input}(\tau_i)`, and :math:`G^{\rm exact}(\tau_i)`.
    ``SpM`` program actually reads only one column, in this case, the second column containing :math:`G^{\rm input}(\tau_i)`.
    User is requested to specify with ``column`` parameter which column should be read.
    Note that the value of :math:`G(\tau=\beta)` needs to be given in order to evaluate the integral intensity of :math:`\rho(\omega)`. It means that the integrated intensity is not necessarily be equal to 1 (0 for off-diagonal Green's function and some finite value for the self energy).

#. Parameters

    Parameters are passed to the ``SpM`` program by a text file.
    The file ``param.in`` shows a setting used in obtaining the demonstrative results;

    ::

        # INPUT/OUTPUT
        statistics="fermion"
        beta=100
        filein_G="Gtau.in"
        column=1
        fileout_spec="spectrum.dat"
        # OMEGA
        Nomega=1001
        omegamin=-4
        omegamax=4
        # ADMM
        lambdalogbegin=2
        lambdalogend=-6
        tolerance=1e-10
        maxiteration=1000

    As in Gtau.in, lines beginning with '#' are skipped.
    For details of each parameter and further optional parameters, see :ref:`inputfiles`


Run SpM
-------

In the directory ``samples/fermion/``, just type the command

::

    $ build_directory/src/SpM.out param.in

Results
-------

Results are stored as ordinary text format in ``output`` directory.
See :ref:`outputfiles` for details of each file.


Plot
-------------

User can generate graphs either in EPS format or in PDF format using gnuplot.
Move into directory ``output``, and type

::

    gnuplot path_to_SpM/samples/plt/*

to generate EPS files of main results. If you prefer PDF format, put ``flag_pdf=1`` option as

::

    gnuplot -e flag_pdf=1 path_to_SpM/samples/plt/*

Note that it requires ``epstopdf`` program in the PATH.
Next, move into directory ``lambda_opt`` and type

::

    gnuplot path_to_SpM/samples/plt/lambda_opt/*

Detailed results for the optimal value of :math:`\lambda` are then plotted.
Again, the option ``flag_pdf=1`` may be put to obtain PDF files.

Let us look at some graphs below.

- *spectrum.eps*

    The final result for the spectrum :math:`\rho(\omega)` is given in the file ``output/spectrum.eps``.

    .. image:: figs/spectrum.jpg

    The red line shows the computed spectrum, and the blue line shows the exact spectrum, which is provided in the file ``Gtau.in.dos`` (not output of the ``SpM`` program).

- *find_lambda_opt.eps*

    User should check how the regularization parameter :math:`\lambda` is determined and whether the choice is reasonable.
    Loot at the file ``output/find_lambda_opt.eps``

    .. image:: figs/find_lambda_opt.jpg

    The peak position gives the optimal choice :math:`\lambda_{\rm opt}=10^{-1.8}`.
    If the peak is not clear, the choice might not be reasonable. In this case, accuracy of the input should be improved.

- *y_sv-log.eps*

    One can see how much information in the input data is used for constructing the spectrum.
    See the file ``output/lambda_opt/y_sv-log.eps``

    .. image:: figs/y_sv-log.jpg

    The light blue points show the input data :math:`G'_l` transformed into the SVD basis, and red circles are data used in computing :math:`\rho(\omega)` above.
    The blue points show, for comparison, the exact :math:`G'_l` without noise, which is provided in the file ``Gtau.in.sv_basis`` (not output of the ``SpM`` program).


Bosonic system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample files are available at ``samples/boson``.

Users can deal with a bosonic system by only changing ``statistics`` parameter to ``"boson"`` from ``"fermion"`` in the parameter file.


SpM-Pade method
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample files are available at ``samples/fermion_twopeak``.

The SpM-Pade method is another SpM AC method, where unphysical oscillation in the SpM spectrum is reduced by using spectra reconstructed by the Pade AC method.

The cost function is

.. math::

   L_\text{SpM-Pade}(\boldsymbol{\rho}) = L_\text{SpM}(\boldsymbol{\rho}) + \frac{\eta}{2} \sum_i w_i \left(\rho(\omega_i) - \rho^\text{Pade}(\omega_i)\right)^2,

where

.. math:: 

   w_i = \left(1.0 + \left(\frac{\sigma^\text{Pade}(\omega_i)}{\rho^\text{Pade}(\omega_i)}\right)^2\right)^{-1}

and :math:`\rho^\text{Pade}(\omega_i)` and :math:`\sigma^\text{Pade}(\omega_i)` are the expectation value and standard deviation of the spectrum reconstructed by the Pade AC method from ``NSamplePade`` Green's functions with independent Gaussian noise.
The strength of the Gaussian noise is specified by ``g_sigma`` or the pair of ``filein_Gsigma`` and ``column_sigma`` parameters (see :ref:`inputfiles` for details).
The coefficient of the Pade weight, :math:`eta`, is specified by the ``PadeEta`` parameter.
If ``PadeEta = 0``, the original SpM method will be used.

``param_spm.in`` and ``param_spmpade.in`` are input files for the SpM (:math:`\eta=0`) and SpM-Pade (:math:`\eta=1`) method, respectively.
Note that optimal :math:`\lambda` for the SpM and SpM-Pade differ, and hence users may need to change the range of :math:`lambda` (``lambdalogbegin`` and ``lambdalogend``).
The following figure shows the result:

.. image:: figs/spectrum_spmpade.png

The blue curve and red curve show the spectrum reconstructed by the SpM method (:math:`\eta=0`) and the SpM-Pade method (:math:`\eta=1`), respectively.
The black dashed curve shows the exact spectrum.
